# Sea Level

## Highlights

- Sea level has risen across the Pacific Islands region.  In much of the western tropical Pacific sea level has risen approximately 10–15 cm (4–6 in), close to or nearly twice the global rate measured since 1993.  In the central tropical Pacific sea level has risen approximately 5–10 cm (2–4 in).
- For the most part, local rates of change obtained from tide gauges are in agreement with those derived from satellites.  However, owing to vertical land motion and other factors, there are locations such as Pago Pago, American Samoa where the local change of 31 ± 7 cm. (12 in ± 3 in) since 1993 as measured in the tide gauge is well above the amount derived from satellite observations.
 - Natural patterns of variability play an important role in regional and local variation in sea level.  These seasonal, interannual, and multi-decadal changes in sea level sometimes exceed 30 cm (12 in) above or below normal, which is a much larger amplitude than the observed long-term trend.
- Rising mean sea levels have resulted in dramatic increases in the frequency of minor flooding since 1980.  Notable increases include: Guam from 2 to 22 times a year (a 1000% increase); Penrhyn, Cook Islands from 5 to 43 times a year (a 760% increase); Majuro, Republic of the Marshall Islands from 2 to 20 times a year (a 900% increase); Papeete, French Polynesia from 5 to 34 times a year (a 548% increase); and Pago Pago, American Samoa from 0 to 102 times a year.


## Background

Changes in mean sea level are indicative of overall warming of the ocean and melting of ice on land. Rising sea level is a crucial issue for many islands in the Pacific. It causes ocean inundation, increased coastal flooding when coupled with waves, and shoreline erosion that leads to building and infrastructure damage.  Impacts of higher sea levels also occur as a result of saltwater intrusion and inundation of aquifers and other domestic water supplies, and salinization and flood damage to agriculture.

Sea level trends measured in many Pacific Islands differ relative to the absolute change in global mean sea level (GMSL), depending on the location and year. Several factors contribute to this spatial and temporal variability.  There are contrasting regional fingerprints in sea level rise (SLR) caused by global warming.  Natural climate variability is associated with large sea level fluctuations in the tropical western and Pacific.  Naturally-occurring regional SLR variations due to ENSO on interannual time scales, and the Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO)/Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) on decadal to multi-decadal time scales can amplify or dampen the underlying trends arising from global warming., with below-normal sea levels during El Niño events and above-normal sea levels during La Niña.  There are also factors other than climate variability that can have a strong effect on coastal sea levels in Pacific Islands. Vertical land motion (e.g., associated with some earthquakes) is large for several Pacific Islands (e.g., the the Samoan Archipelago) and can account for substantial differences in sea level trends measured by tide gauges and satellites, because the tide gauge instruments record water levels relative to the elevation of the land. 

Local sea level variability and trends account for substantial changes in minor flooding.  Minor flooding (also commonly referred to as high or king tide flooding, nuisance flooding) can occur when exceptionally high tides combine with large waves and/or other oceanic and atmospheric phenomena that raise the coastal water level.  Though their impacts are less than major floods, which occur during severe storms, the cumulative impacts associated with minor flooding can be considerable.

